so this is probably evidence of in a
sense the first images of the very first
generation of stars hydrogen is not
likely to be a fuel of the future
gravity is probably not a force AI is
likely to cause severe problems for
humans in the next five years okay you
get the picture now look we cannot speak
unambiguously language is always
necessarily imprecise to some degree but
science reporting by scientists and
science communicators it seems as
saturated in prophecies prophecies and
hedges now sometimes this is okay when
people are uncertain they should say
that they are but when we have a good
explanation there's no need to hedge if
we're being rational we can just say
something is the case and by is the case
I mean no to be the case we can say
gravity is not a force which means I
know that gravity is not a force and
what that does not mean is that I am
certain without any possibility of being
wrong that gravity is a force they might
very well turn out that one day the
successor Theory to general relativity
reveals that there is some sort of
physical pull on the fabric of
space-time mediated by some kind of
particle of the kind that mediates other
forces in which case it might turn out
to be a force but that is not the
situation that we are in we can say
gravity is not a force in the same way
that we can say kangaroos are not
finches and finches are not fish or
electrons are fundamental or the sky is
blue we're fallible we could always turn
out to be wrong but egregious forms of
science reporting in user often of the
click bait kind where prophecies are
made I want to try and avoid that so
here I'm going to try and do some
science news without the misleading
epistemological baggage we're not going
to say what's probably the case in other
words science news from a critically
empiricist and rational perspective we
concentrate on realism what is actually
going on in the world and not what is
probably going on we look at what
possibly will happen not what is likely
to happen we reflect on what the
evidence has ruled out and how best to
explain the evidence that does exist not
what the weight of evidence probably
indicates to be true here we'll focus on
explanations and experiments not
predictions and prophecies here we'll
tell you what has been understood and
what is yet to be understood not colored
by subjective emotions focused on our
fears about the future just
comprehension and good old-fashioned
learning about theories that explain the
world admit our ignorance avoid being
prophets and say how it is and not what
we hope or in our expert opinion
prophesy what will come to pass let's
leave that to galadriel's mirror
the mirror
mirror many
many something
that have not yet come to pass
I almost wanted to call this how to
report science news news news being new
is new so it's not the holds so there's
uncertainty in what is new well there's
uncertainty in what is old as well but
especially in what is New Look
journalists have a hard time agreeing on
what just happened what is happening on
camera right now or what happened
yesterday historians have difficulty
agreeing on what happened decades and
centuries ago is it any Wonder science
communicators and scientists are
uncertain about what was reported in the
literature yesterday or last year okay
so how do we do this what we should
avoid is probably discovered here take a
note from the journalists it's alleged
that they allege they say in times of
uncertainty just say you do not know but
it's alleged that or they might have
claimed something or other they being
the scientists but always be willing to
say you don't know I don't know and
rather often that's what I'm going to
say here I just don't know without
further ado where did all of this come
from it is a sign of Rapid progress that
now almost everyone watching will be
able to give some account in terms of
the big bang and then Stellar Evolution
resulting at some point in a supernova
blast which scatters heavy elements
carbon nitrogen oxygen aluminum silicon
phosphorus sulfur magnesium iron indeed
everything on the periodic table up to
and including uranium and possibly
Beyond namely all of those building
blocks from which simple and complex
compounds that occur naturally from
methane all the way up to DNA can be
produced and ultimately people and all
of our technological artifacts but how
complete is that picture of the origins
of our chemical world to a papyrian
there can be no complete picture but the
details will be filled into a greater or
lesser degree and when one question is
answered ten more or even many more than
that rise up in its place so the
universe began with a big bang and that
explains the cosmic microwave background
we see in every direction we point our
telescopes the heat remaining in the
universe left over from The Big Bang
okay then the question arises why is
that background radiation so very
uniform indicating the early Universe
was very uniform while the present day
universe is anything but uniform it's
lumpy and filled with galaxies over here
and there well in other places the
majority of the universe is completely
empty space empty space populated by
lumpy galaxies is not uniform if we
began in a big bang why did it happen
then and not later or earlier why did it
occur with that precise force or
pressure or energy expanding space why
not faster or slower for each answer we
Glimpse new questions problems we can
now see because a solution Has Lifted us
just a little higher bringing into view
more of the unknown and more of that
ignorance so many will know that our
Story begins with the big bang and it
ends on this day the day that you're
watching this with the present-day solar
system well hopefully it doesn't end but
you take my meaning time up until this
point is explained by recourse to a big
bang 13.7 or 8 billion years ago a solar
system that formed from gas and other
material that existed prior to the
existence of the Sun and that material
is what the earth is made from all the
elements on the periodic table that
occur naturally occur naturally on Earth
here we have it all when it comes to the
building blocks of chemistry so these
elements on Earth were forged elsewhere
a long time ago but not so long back as
the Big Bang because we know that at the
Big Bang the hottest instant of time
that has ever been the very instant that
space time itself came into being the
temperature was so high no solid matter
could have existed the forget solid
matter which would have melted instantly
forget liquid matter which would have
vaporized forget molecules or atoms of
gas which would have shaken themselves
apart no material thing could have been
temperature among other things is a
measure of the average kinetic energy of
or speed at which particles move and in
particular vibrate as the temperature
increases particles Shake more and more
and in the solid phase they can shake so
much they Shake free of their bonds and
begin to slide around one another that's
called melting when liquid they can
shake so much they achieve escape
velocity from the solid state and become
gases that's called vaporization Shaker
gaseous atom enough and its electrons
fly free from their nuclei and Shake
even the subatomic particles enough and
they will shake themselves apart as well
being converted into so-called
Elementary particles the quarks and the
leptons like electrons and the bosons
like photons but those Elementary
particles are far from being atoms
forming atoms like atoms of hydrogen
requires necessarily a lower temperature
so continue to raise the temperature and
everything will shake itself apart into
its elementary particle constituents so
far as we know so if you want to make an
atom you have to have a minimum viable
temperature at which the atom will form
otherwise the temperature will be too
high and the thing will just shake
itself apart the forces that Bond the
atom together won't be sufficient to
hold it together so forming atoms like
atoms of hydrogen requires a low
temperature relatively to that which
existed at the Big Bang but happily if
you're deciding to generate a universe
using the Big Bang mechanism there
exists a simple law of physics that says
is if the amount of energy in a volume
of space is constant but then that space
expands as happened after the big bang
then the temperature will fall as that
fixed amount of energy that you've got
in your newly created Universe must feel
a greater region of space and indeed
that's what happened space expanded
after the big bang and it's been
expanding ever since and the temperature
fell immediately after the big bang due
to that expansion and the quarks for one
thing were no longer vibrating quite so
violently so they could bond with one
another take two up quarks and one down
quark and very well the gluons that bind
them together as well and one can form a
proton and thus the very first chemical
formed hydrogen in particular positively
charged ions of hydrogen or if instead
we take one up quark and two down quarks
then we're able to construct a neutron
once you've hydrogen atoms and neutrons
and enough of them in your newly formed
Universe then so long long as the
temperature remains high enough those
particles can bond together to form
something called deuterium heavy
hydrogen and tritium even heavier
hydrogen hydrogen with one proton that's
by definition and two neutrons that's
tritium but most interestingly we can if
the temperature remains high enough for
long enough get some hydrogen nuclei to
bond together and form a whole new
chemical helium the process is simple if
you know a little nuclear physics and
perhaps a little more complex if you do
not but this is a momentous series of
reactions beginning with Elementary
particles quarks and stepping through
various isotopes of hydrogen resulting
in helium but here is our problem we
need a high temperature in order for
Fusion to take place to have a proton
and neutron bond to form heavy hydrogen
presents a simple engineering problem we
just need to get them close enough
together because they want to stick as
if each particle is coated in a kind of
super glue that's the strong nuclear
force but if we wish to take hydrogen to
be specific isotopes of hydrogen nuclei
the technical term for which is nuclide
nuclei with equal numbers of protons but
different numbers of neutrons if we want
to get those close together we have a
problem because they're all positively
charged and positively charged nuclei
repel one another like charges do that
but if our temperature is high enough
then our particles are zipping about
fast enough that they can overcome that
static repulsion and touch and stick and
remain stuck so there we have it we can
form helium so why can we not keep doing
this at the Big Bang well by the time we
have lots of helium in the early
Universe formed by this very process the
universe has continued to expand at an
astonishing rate and as we've already
said an expanding Universe means a lower
temperature those particles begin to
move slower so now we have a triple
barreled engineering problem on the one
hand the particles we wish to collide to
fuse and form heavier elements the
helium we have just produced are now
moving so slowly they will tend to repel
one another before they even have a
chance to collide and worse helium is
twice the charge of hydrogen so it will
repel any other positive charge coming
towards it with twice the force as any
hydrogen nuclei slower moving particles
with twice the repulsive charge will not
fuse together and last of all by the
time we might have enough helium in the
universe to produce other elements on
the periodic table by this process of
fusion the universe has expanded so much
that the density of particles is that
much lower so the chance of nuclei
finding each other in empty space so
that that fusion reaction can take place
at all is so much smaller the Big Bang
so-called Big Bang nucleosynthesis is
therefore over and done and the universe
now finds itself consisting of mainly
hydrogen 75 and helium 25 by mass and
many many many more photons and much
much much much much much much more empty
space from this material the first stars
formed then they died and some exploded
spreading their innards throughout the
space in between Stars mixing that
material with pre-existing hydrogen and
helium enriching as we say the
interstellar medium and from this yet
other stars formed then some of those
exploded in other stars again formed and
so it went and the sun was eventually
formed from what we say as some of that
enriched Interstellar material and it's
also what the Earth formed from enriched
by those Supernova explosions so that's
it then case closed on how the solar
system formed that's the story since the
beginning of the Big Bang there is one
step in this sequence I want to focus on
now and the title of this video No Doubt
gives some clue about this there are
many open questions in Stellar Evolution
and how it is precisely the elements of
the periodic table were formed we could
pull on many strands but for me one of
the most fascinating Remains the nature
of those very first stars that were
formed by a quirk of History the sun was
is labeled alongside many other stars
that had Telltale signatures indicating
a high proportion of heavy elements in
their atmospheres population one
population one stars are said to be
metal rich and that just means they
contain a higher proportion of elements
from lithium on up through the periodic
table population two stars on the other
hand have a far lower proportion of
metals in general but if one learns this
as a student of astrophysics one is
immediately struck by the omission of
stars with absolutely zero evidence of
metals in their Spectra that is after
all how we tell what elements are in
stars at all we point telescopes at
stars sure but we can also attach to our
telescope something called a
spectroscope and if you want to be
really precise you use something called
an a shell grating which is a piece of
glass with grooves in it but there are
all sorts of spectroscopes the James
Webb Space Telescope has a particularly
Advanced one but whatever you're using
basically the idea is the same as what
Newton did all those centuries ago if
Newton is famous for one thing after his
explanations of gravity and motion it
was his investigations into light and
passing white light through a prism to
see it split into all the colors of the
rainbow yeah sure others knew about this
rainbows after all were a thing in the
sky that anyone could see but Newton did
precise measurements whatever the case
the splitting up of light into Spectra
reveals what the light consists of and
without going into a lengthy Exposition
on the chemistry and physics here
different chemicals when heated produce
different colored light different
wavelengths and so when we look at stars
we do not find a continuous Spectra in
other words we do not find all the
colors of the rainbow but something
rather different and somewhat more
complex sometimes missing dark bands
from The Continuous Spectrum there those
are areas where so-called absorption
spectra absorption lines where
wavelengths of Light have been absorbed
by a cooler gases and emission lines
bright lines caused by hot gases glowing
this is what anyone can see with a
spectroscope in the chemistry lab by
simply heating a gas in an evacuated
tube at low pressure we've all seen neon
lights look at a neon light with a
spectroscope if you can get your hand on
a spectroscope actually rather
inexpensive in fact you can do exactly
the same thing with fluorescent lights
if you've got some of those each
chemical indeed each atom in each
complex molecule has that characteristic
Spectrum so first approximation chemists
and astronomers in particular use such
Spectra to identify the chemical
constituents of the thing they are
observing so this is how we know when we
look at distance stars for all the stars
we can see whether they're high in
metals or low in metals whether they're
population one like the sun which are
high in metals or low in metals which is
population two but even the population
two stars have some metals they're
merely low in metals they don't it's not
like they have zero so this implies the
existence of a third population
population three stars stars without
Metals at all stars made solely of the
Big Bang stuff purely of 75 hydrogen and
25 helium approximately why do these
population three stars typically not
feature in our taxonomy of stars well
they do but they get short shrift if
you're studying astrophysics and
astronomy consult most texts in these
fields and these Stars barely appear at
all this is peculiar for astronomy texts
where in general they linger over the
unknown and the problematic that's par
for the course if there are open
questions on dark matter and dark energy
and they have have often hold chapters
devoted to the mystery of these entities
population three stars however the first
stars in the cosmos may get a hand
waving sentence that they are
hypothetical Stars hypothetical
necessary would be closer to the mark it
is necessarily the case that the first
stars to form formed from nothing but
hydrogen and helium what it's mysterious
about them is the fact they have not yet
been observed but really is that that
mysterious well because it's very hard
to see things that happened just after
the big bang but the fact is no
telescope it seems hitherto hitherto has
ever captured light from a population
three star that we know of but as I say
is that really so mysterious when I
asked about this many years ago as a
student myself in lectures I was offered
the idea that they well would have been
so massive that they would have been
really short-lived and therefore all of
them have long since exploded a
supernova so of course now 13 billion
years later we're not going to see any
of them certainly not in our vicinity
but I thought surely looking deep into
space means looking far back into time
well why can't we see them there surely
those photons are out there but it was
kind of implied that well seeing
individual Stars billions of light years
away a Fool's errand we struggle to see
entire galaxies that far away well that
seems that then and yet as I say those
photons are out there if those Stars
existed then they would have Shone
brightly and if we can observe the
cosmic microwave background then we can
observe population three stars surely
population three stars occupy a curious
position in astronomy and science
generally they're rather like the first
form of life in biology paleontology and
geology it necessarily exists they
necessarily exist but there has so far
been no evidence found of them the light
from those stars is out there ripe for
collection but our instruments have so
far proved too feeble to collect that
light after all they would be too small
and that light too dim compared to the
whole galaxies and they are so very
distant which is the worst combination
in astronomy d him compared to whole
galaxies and extremely distant but okay
the James Webb Space Telescope is
designed to see dim and distant things
and more importantly and here's the key
there exists a phenomena in the universe
that allows for a specially distant
objects to be seen gravitational lensing
and just as it sounds this is the
physical effect whereby some Galaxy but
typically a large cluster of galaxies is
between us the Observer and some very
distant object like a very very distant
Galaxy the light from that very very
distant Galaxy bends around the cluster
in between us and the object and as
lensing does magnifies the image so we
have this fortuitous arrangement of
objects in the universe in certain
circumstances allowing us to see objects
which might otherwise be physically
impossible to observe given our present
state of telescope technology and if we
take some of the astrophysical
literature on this at face value this
effect can be striking indeed one star
is claimed to have produced like to me
900 million years after the big bang and
a redshift of 6.2 that's phenomenal but
this paper claims it to be true and it's
published in nature and so on in this
particular case they are waiting for the
James Webb Space Telescope to confirm as
they say with its spectroscope we would
say rule out the fact that it's not a
population three star rather than
confirm that it is that aside perhaps
they can image the Spectra of this
single star now of course over 900
million years much can happen in other
words between the big bang and when the
star apparently existed there could have
been other Supernova going on enriching
the interstellar medium there in other
words this could be a second generation
star we just do not know without the
Spectra when we have it we'll know but
right now we don't know and isn't it
easy just to say that we don't know we
don't know whether this star is a
population three star it's a candidate
here's what we know we've got this
Spectra from a star that could possibly
be population three star but it did
exist 900 million years after the big
bang so after all it could be a second
generation star but at the moment we
don't know here's what it will take to
know we need spectroscopic analysis I
don't have to say it's likely a
population three star or that it's
probably not a population three star or
anything of the sort my hopes and dreams
and fears don't have to come into it at
all this isn't that hard reporting on
new scientists after all now before I
return to the actual point of this video
which is claims that some scientists
have actually observed a population
three star with the James Webb Space
Telescope recently I want to linger on
some of the unusual possible properties
of population three stars low
metallicity can actually do something to
the brightness of a star in particular
what metals do inside of their stars is
can act as a kind of reaction Catalyst
which changes the rate at which fuel is
consumed among other things now for
other convoluted reasons and among other
factors this can affect what's known as
the Eddington limit or the Eddington
Luminosity now what that is is this is
the brightness you can calculate or
rather the maximum possible brightness
that a star can have given a particular
Mass why should there be a maximum
possible brightness that a star can have
given a particular Mass why should there
be a maximum mass for that matter well
because if you have a certain mass that
means you have a certain amount of
gravity the strength of the gravity is
determined by the amount of mass that
you have the gravity keeps the material
held together and the force that acts
against that gravitational collapse well
this is called the radiation pressure
that comes from the core of the star
which is heating up under pressure the
hotter a star which is detoned by the
temperature of the core which is
determined by the strength of the
gravity on that core compressing
everything together the hotter the star
the more the material in it wants to
expand hot things tend to want to expand
the heat is racing out of the Star as
radiation and that radiation pushes on
the atoms and the nuclei trying to rip
the star apart but gravity keeps the
whole thing held together into a sphere
so this is a battle going on between
gravity in and the radiation pressure
outwards okay so there's a limit to how
high the temperature can be and how
great the Luminosity can be given the
strength of gravity which is determined
by the mass of the object all very well
but some objects seem to exceed the
Eddington limits or rather maybe they do
maybe they don't ITA karinai this
unstable star it might actually be two
stars it might be a binary star we don't
know it seems to exceed the Eddington
limit but of course it's unstable so
maybe the rules don't apply to that
because of the fact it's unstable so
eddington's formula doesn't actually
apply to it but this Eddington limit
concept leads straight to the notion
that well there should be an upper mass
for stars period after all on the one
hand keep throwing mass at a star and
the core is pressed more and more
tightly together by gravity and
eventually you overcome the
electrostatic force of repulsion between
the quarks the whole thing will collapse
into a black hole but well if the
temperature is high enough at the core
well then the nuclei there the protons
are moving about so fast that they won't
be forced inside one another and vanish
into a black hole so again we have a
balancing act but if we add yet more
mass we get more compression and we get
a higher temperature you compress a gas
and its temperature increases that's
simple physics well if that happens then
the rest of the star also heats up due
to the energy coming from that
increasingly hot core so the core is hot
due to the nuclear reactions going on
there and the hotter it is the more that
the core heats up the parts of the star
where the nuclear reactions are not
going on namely the rest of the
atmosphere of the star and well you can
just imagine that if the core is so very
hot because the star is so very massive
that the temperature becomes so great
that the star expands so much that its
outer atmosphere just blows away because
it has expanded so far away from the
core or and this seems to be what most
of these simulations and calculations
suggest there is an upper limit for the
mass of the star because with super high
mass stars well the super high mass
means super high compression of the core
which means super high temperature of
the core which means a rate of reaction
that is so high that it results in an
explosion as you increase the mass of
the core of a star the temperature goes
up and the temperature cause is an
increased reaction rate nuclear fusion
is happening faster and faster and
faster well there's an upper limit to
that before the whole thing just is run
away into a complete explosion of the
core the star literally explodes if it
gets too massive because it gets too hot
because the reactions are occurring at a
rate that's too fast and that's why you
don't see stars with masses you know
above 100 solar masses in fact rarely do
you see stars with masses above like 20
times the mass of the Sun they're very
very rare and the reason is that once
you get really really hot you you simply
can't accrete material fast enough and
and astronomers know this because they
do simulations of what would happen so
they're working in the laboratory of uh
computer simulations and not a real
laboratory but this is what the
simulations tell them and this is why
you don't observe those things out there
because the laws of physics tell us you
know what a computer simulation should
be programmed to do and the computer
simulations don't reveal these super
massive stars instead all the material
that should be falling into the star to
increase its mass gets blown away
because the core is already heated up
and heating cores caused the heating of
the interstellar medium which blows away
any of the gas that would otherwise
accrete to the star the radiation
pressure exceeds the gravitational
collapse accrete means collect material
to it or collect Mass to it or sweep up
Mass from its surroundings and cause
that stuff to become part of the star to
summarize that in other words a star can
only attract gas and other material dust
mass in other words if the gravitational
collapse the pull on the material
exceeds the tendency of the radiation
pressure due to the high temperature to
blow all that material away from its
surroundings and yet this is important
to note the peer-reviewed literature and
science articles on this suggest vast
masses for some metal deficient and in
particular population three stars and
there this is one of the exciting Parts
about astronomy there's this great
disagreement in the field you you have
people quoting masses for some of these
primitive Stars these population three
stars have hundreds 200 300 a thousand
ten thousand and in one case one paper I
saw with respected astrophysics quoting
a hundred thousand times the mass of the
Sun some stars out there possibly having
this kind of mass now those last two
numbers in particular 10 to the power of
four and ten to the power of five solar
masses ten thousand a hundred thousand
solar masses well I did write to one
astrophysicist who was an author on one
of these papers and I didn't hear
anything back and my seeing things
I wanted to know if I was seeing things
in this paper but no apparently I'm not
I I read it more than once why why
should this be possible why should this
be possible why can we exceed the
Eddington limit by that amount why
wouldn't the temperature of our a 10 000
solar mass star be so high as to blow
away all the surrounding gas preventing
it from ever getting to that kind of a
mass well look there is one possible
mechanism here and it's called the
porous atmosphere which is what it
sounds like if you've got a low metal
atmosphere in fact a zero metal
atmosphere then as the radiation comes
out from your core it just shoots right
on through the star's atmosphere because
it intercepts very little along the way
photons have a very small
cross-sectional area and so too does
hydrogen and helium and thus the star's
atmosphere can't expand very much the
radiation won't cause the expansion of
those stars and therefore won't reduce
their Mass s or the tendency for those
stars to collect more or you'll create
more material under Gravity because
hydrogen and helium alone are so small
like I say they're cross-sectional area
is so small that if you're trying to
shoot these nuclei with the bullets that
are photons you're just going to miss
them the photons just never interact
with the hydrogen and the helium or
rather they very rarely interact with
them the star literally leaks its energy
into space without the star itself
heating up much as it does when you've
got metal Rich stars or even just some
proportion of metals in those Stars so
there's one possible explanation for the
fact that these population three stars
might on average be very very massive
and have a mass function or mass
distribution that is very very top heavy
as compared to the Stars we see around
the Milky Way and nearby another way of
putting this is that perhaps these
population three stars these massive
massive stars are made of gas that has
very low capacity it's transparent now
opacity it turns out is actually
accounted for by the Eddington
Luminosity calculations and the formula
used to calculate it includes a term for
opacity but still but still there appear
to be stars that exceed this limit are
observed to exceed this limit as always
astronomy has delivered problems with
the observations made by improved
technology the problems are the
Mysteries that drive the Curiosity of
astronomers and push people to create
look more creative theories and better
Technologies to see further and in finer
detail which is why we have the James
Webb Space Telescope up there in the
first place and why we have better
rockets and why we have improved
computers and lenders and spectroscopes
and cameras and robots and code and so
it goes we can read papers such as this
one you know titled characterization of
population three stars with Stellar
atmospheres and evolutionary modeling
and predictions of their observability
with the James Webb Space Telescope and
well as this is a video about population
three stars and here's a lovely paper
about population three stars let's let's
read a little what they say is quote A
Renewed interest in direct detection of
individual population three stars has
developed in anticipation of
observations with the next generation of
ground and space-based facilities in
particular that recently launched James
Webb Space Telescope using the main
sequence properties of population 3
stars from The evolutionary calculations
in a paper in 2002 and new metal free
models calculated with the Tulsi code
some astronomers one named rydberg
estimated the observable properties of
isolated primordial stars at a range of
redshifts and Stellar masses without
gravitational lensing population three
stars appear too faint to be detected
even at the lowest redshift Z equals two
and an extremely long exposures 100
hours ridberg 2013 also considered the
case of a favorable lensed observation
through a given Galaxy class one of the
largest gravitational lenses known even
in the lensed case a realistic detection
was found to require either an extremely
heavy population 3 candidate greater
than 300 solar masses or a primordial
star formation rates far in excess of
theoretical expectation end quote so
they're pouring a little bit of cold
water over the idea that the James Webb
Space Telescope is going to be able to
show us evidence of these population
three stars but we shouldn't give up
hope I mean as I mentioned earlier there
are these other papers this one in
particular let's go to that where never
mind
300 solar masses this paper here titled
quote the evolution of supermassive
population 3 stars and well let's just
read the abstract this was published in
high profile journal the monthly notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society second
only to the astrophysical journal
perhaps for Prestige in this particular
field and well here the abstract says
quote supermassive Prime audio Stars
forming in atomically cooled Halos at
Zed 15 to 20 and just by the way that's
an extremely long way off I currently
thought to be the progenitors of the
earliest quasars in the universe and
quite just pausing there so they're
saying that these primordial stars is
population three stars are thought to be
the things that cause quasars okay they
are the the reason for the existence of
quasars that we can see curious very
interesting let's keep going they say in
this picture the star evolves under
accretion rates of 0.1 to one solar mass
per year until the general relativistic
instability triggers its collapse to a
black hole at masses of 10 to the power
of 5 in other words 10 000 times the
mass of the Sun end quote well that's
another astonishing fact I mean they're
they're quoting that possibly some of
these stars are Crete material at the
rate of one entire Sun per year they're
swallowing up an entire Sun's worth of
gas per year that's massive and they can
reach a mass this is a single star
reaching a mass of 10 000 solar masses
at which point the entire thing
collapses into a black hole and then you
get your quasar
well there this is a sort of a turn up
for the books for me I didn't think this
sort of thing could happen but you know
I'm not a professional astronomer I'm an
amateur in these areas you know I might
have done a degree in this but I don't
keep up with every single area of the
literature and so in reading this I was
sort of surprised at the numbers that
they were throwing at me but anyway you
know this is a good set of authors here
these people aren't cranks so far as I
know respected universities and all that
kind of thing you know if I need a
heuristic about whether or not these
people are trying to pull the wall over
my eyes well no they seem to be it seems
to be astrophysics as they will go on to
say they're using code and the code is
of course based upon known astrophysics
I presume let's keep going what they
what they write in the abstract quote
however the ability of the accretion
flow to sustain such high rates depends
crucially on the photospheric properties
of the accreting star because it's
ionizing radiation could reduce or even
halt accretion here we present new
models of supermassive population three
protostars are creating at rates of
0.01 to 10 solar masses per year
computed with the Geneva Stellar
Evolution code including General
relativistic corrections to the internal
structure end quote okay so these people
are not lunatics but you know they are
using this code okay in other words a
simulation of stars evolving over time
programmed with General relativistic
corrections okay so in other words
corrections to the way in which gravity
Works to collapse a particular star and
then of course cause the reaction rate
of the nuclear reaction Fusion rate to
occur at a particular rate and have a
temperature of a particular amount and
presumably they're looking at things
like the Eddington limit to see whether
or not this star would blow itself apart
I'm guessing I'm guessing but to accrete
material at that rate swallowing up 10
Sun's worth of material per year that is
astounding as standing kind of stuff
okay let's keep going that seems like a
quasar but they're not talking about
quasars they're not talking about
quasars they're talking about a star the
first stars in the universe swallowing
material at that rate to fuel their own
brightness and fusion okay so they're
doing that these stars are obviously not
going to be stars for long because
you're getting up to 10 000 times the
mass of the Sun Well in terms of Stellar
lifetimes my goodness okay so they go on
to say quote we use the polytropic
stability Criterion to estimate the mass
at which the collapse occurs which has
been shown to give a lower limit of the
actual mass at collapse in recent
hydrodynamic simulations we find that at
accretion rates higher the North Point
North North 1 solar masses per year the
Stars evolve as red cool supergiants
with surface features below 10 to the
power of 4 in other words 10 000 Kelvin
towards masses of 10 to the power five
in other words a hundred thousand solar
masses and become blue and hot with
surface temperatures above 10 to the
power of 5 Kelvin 10 000 Kelvin only for
rates
0.01 solar masses per year compared to
previous studies our results extend the
range of masses and accretion rates at
which the ionizing feedback remains weak
reinforcing the case for direct collapse
as the origin of the first quasars end
quote well yes that that is certainly
extending the range of masses and
accretion rates I mean extending the
range of mass up to a hundred thousand
times the mass of the Sun for a single
star accreting material at the rate of
10 solar masses per year astonishing
astonishing stuff if true if true but
apparently their simulation allows them
to do this in other words the star is
forming the star is forming and it's
stable and then the whole thing
collapses into a a black hole and
forming a quasar okay wow so if we can
according to the simulations and the
theory have such high mass Lumina Stars
template perhaps James Webb the Space
Telescope can indeed image these things
or at least get Spectra of some so has
it well let's go to this recent news
which is really the reason for this
episode because I am absolutely
fascinated by this the news for what it
is comes down to a pre-print which is
here and it was picked up by a few
different popularizers now all research
and astronomy has put into the pre-print
archive as it's called anything ever
that was published in astronomy always
ends up here delivered for free but
sometimes it doesn't get peer reviewed
but this is researchers using the James
Webb Space Telescope so automatically
they have to apply to the James Webb
Space Telescope committee NASA and and
others to get time so you already have
to have a certain level of
respectability in the field so again
these aren't nut cases that are off the
wall kind of thing you know these are
these are the real deal astronomers of
course that doesn't prevent them from
making errors they could of course make
errors but this particular paper hasn't
yet been published in any of the
astrophysical journals they've submitted
it to Nature okay so possibly the most
prestigious journal on the face of the
planets so they haven't they've bypassed
the regular astronomy journals and
they've gone straight to a general
scientific journal okay which deals with
all sorts of Science and so uh nature
wants to publish some of this stuff
because you know it's coming from the
James Webb Space Telescope the most
fashionable thing in astronomy right now
the hottest thing in astronomy right now
is that anything coming out of the James
Webb Space Telescope so of course nature
would want to publish it and people want
to publish in nature and so on we exist
in a culture of prestige but happily for
us happily for us astronomy still has
this culture of Simply publishing stuff
for free on the archive and so quite
often these papers as they appear in the
archive appear almost identical almost
identical to when they're published
behind a paywall in nature okay but when
you cite these things as a university
student or you need to reference them as
an actual researcher yourself
you you can't really do so until the
thing has been published in the
peer-reviewed literature well you can
but you need to say it's you know not
yet peer-reviewed so everyone's waiting
for this thing to be peer-reviewed what
does that mean well it means a bunch of
other astronomers referees are going to
read this pre-print and decide whether
or not it deserves to appear in nature
that's what's going on right now and so
it's been some months since this thing's
been published and we're still waiting
for it to appear in nature so I don't
know how they're checking this data and
how they're checking exactly whether the
paper is the digit or not but apparently
that's what's going on I don't know how
many referees would read it too maybe
they send it out to a dozen or something
astronomers are forever complaining by
the way this kind of thing because often
the referees don't get paid sometimes
they do but quite often they don't you
know you're asked to be a a an anonymous
referee read this paper and tell us your
expert opinion on whether or not this is
legit or not or is there obvious errors
here and then once it's been through
that process then it gets that's what
peer review is so this paper that I'm
reading from hasn't been through peer
review although it kind of has because
you know there are multiple authors here
and so they're checking each other so
that's one method of error correction
but also they had to apply in the first
place to use the James Webb Space
Telescope so the very idea of what they
were doing had to be presented to a
committee of people who were experts who
had to tick off the fact that yeah this
seems legit this is working and you know
and there would be technicians involved
and there would be a wider community of
people they're talking to sharing their
results with before it even gets to the
peer review stage and then no doubt
they've got colleagues that you know are
helping them out and all that kind of
stuff goes on as well once again let's
just read parts of this in particular
let's just look at the abstract it's
titled titled a strong
HE2 Lambda
1640 emitter with extremely blue UV
spectral slope at Z equals 8.16 presence
of population three stars question mark
okay firstly we need to unpack a little
bit of that what is this HE2 stuff so as
I explained earlier every single
chemical every atom every molecule has
its own unique Spectra when you heat it
up it will glow and if you look at this
thing using a spectroscope you'll see
specific lines in the Spectrum okay so
helium has a particular Spectra helium
if you continue to heat it we'll shake
around it'll vibrate we've been through
that and it will lose one of its
electrons that means it's singly ionized
it's lost one of its electrons now
helium holds onto its electrons very
very tightly I'll come back to that if
you continue to heat the thing then it
will lose both of its electrons you have
to heat it really really strongly get it
vibrating a real lot in order for it to
completely lose its two electrons but if
you do that then you've got this thing
called HE2 doubly ionized helium and so
it produces a spectral line of
wavelength 1640 nanometers there we go
go okay so what does the abstract say
let's read through this Cosmic hydrogen
reionization and Cosmic production of
first metals are major phase transitions
in the universe occurring during the
first billion years after the big bang
end quote so this first part Cosmic
hydrogen reionization so what we have in
the early Universe just after the big
bang is the temperature so high that
hydrogen initially hydrogen consists of
one proton and the atoms of it consist
of one proton with one electron orbiting
that proton that's a hydrogen atom so
that would form after the big bang once
conditions have cooled sufficiently for
the electrons who bind itself to nuclei
now if you remove that electron you get
ionization now you have realized so very
early on in the universe all of the
hydrogen is ionized it's just free
protons floating around and free
electrons because the temperature is so
high these two things can't bond
together because everything's moving too
fast but once the universe has expanded
sufficiently then the temperature is
cooled so the electron can actually bond
with the proton I say bond with but you
know form a stable atom a neutral atom
well when the first stars form after the
population three stars they're very very
hot and they can reionize things so the
free hydrogens floating around now that
is neutral hydrogen atoms can be ionized
again they can lose their electrons why
because the entire universe begins to
heat up again why would it heat up again
because it's got stars in it now it's
got stars in it now so initially it's
really hot after the big bang it cools
down cools down cools down the first
stars form and then the whole thing
heats up again and so therefore you get
this reionization of certainly the
regions around the Stars anyway maybe
not the entire universe but you know
parts of the universe become reionized
that's what's being said there and so
they say this happens in the first
billion years after the big bang but
this uh they go on to say but still
poorly explored observationally yeah
it's a bit hard to see things that far
away that early on in the universe let's
keep going they go and say quote using
the James Webb Space Telescope near spec
prism spectroscopy we report the
discovery of a sub l-star Galaxy at Zed
spec equals 8.1623 plus or minus 0.7 dub
something or other okay so the James
Webb Space Telescope near spec prism
spectroscopy that's the instrument okay
and if you go back to my Origins
um video also about the James Webb Space
Telescope I talk a little about this
near spec prism thing and so this is the
instrument that is used to do
spectroscopy to split the light up like
Newton did only in a more sophisticated
way so we can see these emission lines
from these distant stars and everything
else we report the discovery of a sub
l-star Galaxy now l-star L star is the
Luminosity function which gives you the
average Galaxy Luminosity at a given
Epoch in time so right now there are all
these galaxies that exist in the
universe right now around us you know in
so far as we can have it now in other
words that Z equals zero there's zero
red shift so the galaxies in the local
group and further galaxies in our
neighborhood uh there are bright
galaxies and there are dim galaxies okay
the average galaxy has a brightness of
l-star and the the Milky Way by
coincidence is approximately All Star
that's the Luminosity of the average
Galaxy in our region now if you go to Z
equals one things are different Z equals
two Z equals three we're talking about
redshift here we're getting further and
further away from the Milky Way galaxy
and the further away you get a from the
Milky Way galaxy the further back in
time you're going so the conditions are
different the stars are different the
Luminosity of galaxies is different and
so therefore the average Luminosity of
galaxies is different higher higher you
go all the way back to near the
beginning of the universe and you've got
these things called quasars which are
outshining everything in the known
universe right and so therefore
at the near the beginning of the
universe the earlier you go the much
brighter things are so what they are
saying here is they're reporting on the
discovery of a Galaxy which is less
bright than the typical Galaxy at that
red shift so the redshift of 8.1 which
is a huge redshift that is just soon
after the big bang okay so it's it's a a
long way off I don't know you can be
further than 13.5 billion light years
away because the space can expand at
faster than the speed of light there are
complications here let's not worry about
that right now skipping a little of the
uh the detail here they're saying that
this thing this this galaxy is a strong
HE2 emitter it's got this emission line
it's the the this hydrogen 2 line
indicates a high temperature thing and
in fact they say it's the highest
redshift HE2 line currently known its
high rest frame equivalent width is 19
plus or minus three angstroms and they
go on to talk about different lines okay
different hydrogen lines here and bomber
lines bomber series and this is all part
of this particular galaxies Stellar
populations okay so that the reason why
they're seeing these lines in the
Galaxy's Spectra is because well the
Galaxy Spectra is what the star Spectra
would be and so they then go on to say
these that could be population free like
stars
population three like stars so they've
imaged this this galaxy this is this sub
l-star Galaxy called
rxj2129 and are saying that this is the
most compelling case as we get towards
the end of this abstract here where
Trace population three stars might
coexist with more metal enriched stars
and of course if you're a if you're a
billion years after the big bang
something like that then you've got this
issue of well a lot can happen in that
time between the big bang and the
billion years in other words you can
have generations of stars being born
exploding spewing their contents
throughout the interstellar medium and
then you're getting Reformation of stars
and so you're having metal enrichment
there so if you've got population three
stars mixed in with these population two
stars let's say maybe even population
one Stars after all that time you know
uh the third generation of stars indeed
then you've got difficulties with you
know saying that well this light comes
from population freestyles because it's
intermingled with all this other stuff
okay so that's the end of the abstract
so have they seen populations three
stars is the hype warranted from people
who are talking about this is the first
detection of population three stars well
as they go on to say let's just pick it
up in the paper they go on to say quote
the nebula HE2 line requires a hard
ionizing background radiation which is
usually attributed to Wolf Riot Stars
stripped Stars x-ray binaries or active
Galactic nuclei AGM
the location of the Galaxy
rxj2129 in the mass excitation diagram
and the low limit of something else
disfavor a supermassive black hole as
the culprit end quote okay very well but
that's a problem isn't it
if you're holding a gun a Smoking Gun
and say look Jerry's fingerprinter on
this many might very well conclude well
it's Jerry who fired the gun of course
if you whisper later on during the
investigation yes technically Jerry's
fingerprints are on the gun but so are
Georges elaines and Kramers well then
you've still got the same mystery
attributing the smoking of the gun to
Jerry at that point is not a good
explanation until you can refute that
any of the others are in fact
responsible for the shooting of that gun
so this does seem to be as if this is
the line of reasoning for population
three stars having been observed yes
population three stars are expected to
have helium two lines in the Spectra why
well because they're so hot to remove
the two electrons and doubly ionize
helium wow that's some energy that's
some heat helium is the least reactive
substance in the universe truly to be
reactive you need to gain or lose
electrons but helium has two electrons
and that's it it wants to neither lose
any of them nor gain any more it's two
protons in its nucleus don't want to
attract anymore it's almost a perfectly
stable atom at least as stable as
possible in this universe it won't react
you can't burn it you can't react it
with acid it laughs at oxidation nada
nothing it's not going to react that's
helium those electrons are not going
anywhere and it is electron transfer
that underpins all chemical reactions
all chemistry is about what the
electrons are doing where they are going
how they are being transferred between
one atom or ion and another it is the
science of electron transfer and for
every other element on the periodic
table you can have some of this even
even the other no so-called noble gases
but you think about something like
oxygen it readily gains two more
electrons making it O2 minus that's the
ion in the case of any metal take
lithium or sodium they're they're more
than willing to give up one of their
electrons leading to a a positive ion
and so this is why certain metals are
particularly reactive and why certain
non-metals are particularly reactive
because they're very willing and able to
give away or to gain electrons not
helium not helium helium's electron
never get shared they don't get
transferred in in chemistry you don't
get molecules of helium-2 like you get
O2 there's no hg2 there's no hg2o there
is no hgo helium does not make compounds
because it doesn't react and it does not
react because it does not lose or gain
electrons it's holding tight onto those
electrons so that's chemistry okay but
physics says we'll take those electrons
off you if we can all we need to do is
to heat you up enough to increase your
temperature cause you the helium atom to
move around so much to vibrate so
violently to shake those electrons away
so shake it enough raise the temperature
high enough and and you'll get hell
ha2 hell is the shaking of helium so
much at such a high temperature that you
lose these two electrons so yes of
course this leads to the dad joke that's
common in textbooks on this stuff HE2
doubly ionized helium is hell you need
to be that hot now another word for
doubly iron helium is Alpha radiation an
alpha particle moves very fast but
they're much slower than beta radiation
which is electrons and ways slower still
than gamma rays that move at the speed
of light but whatever the case they've
detected helium-2 here in this very
distant Galaxy but they admit there are
other sources that can produce emission
lines of helium too so we're going to
have to wait for the peer review and
we're gonna have to wait for other
papers and and and in particular people
to write letters astronomers to write
letters that critique this idea I'm not
a professional astronomer this is
certainly not
um my even my particular area of
astronomy insofar as I do have an area
of astronomy and so we have to wait for
the specialists in this area to to talk
about this particular stuff but at the
moment I'm not saying that this is
probably population three or probably
not population three we're in the
situation where we don't know what we
have is an interesting mystery it could
be the case that this is a population
three candidate but how they can
separate out whether it could be some
other source that's causing this helium
too and whether or not you're actually
seeing stars that are simply very very
hot we don't know would aliens on
planets orbiting these population three
stars know that they're orbiting a
population three star no because by
definition they couldn't possibly be
there why could there not be aliens
orbiting population three stars well
because remember what population three
stars are they're made of only big bang
stuff hydrogen and helium now if you
want to form a planet of any kind if you
want to form a planet on which aliens
can actually arise then you're going to
need something more than hydrogen and
helium you want to surface for those
aliens to exist on never mind that you
want to make the aliens out of something
and as we've just said helium's not
going to do it helium is the least
reactive stuff in the entire universe so
could you make an alien out of hydrogen
not really hydrogen bond with itself but
unless there's oxygen around well you're
not even going to get water so you're
not going to have planets around
population 3 restart you're not going to
have aliens made out of population three
material because that is just big bang
stuff so that's my science news it's
exciting we have to wait for this thing
to be published in nature we have to
wait for comments by other
astrophysicists to find out whether or
not we've seen the telltale signs of
population three but it seems to me that
it's not the Smoking Gun we're not going
to say yep there we go population three
has definitely been seen it's just a big
question mark and so these authors are
right to put the question mark there if
they can repeat this with the James Webb
Space Telescope looking at perhaps other
galaxies and they can refine their
techniques then perhaps perhaps this
thing can be done there are other papers
out there to purport to use
gravitational lensing to see individual
population three stars whether or not
you can believe that I don't know but
this is interesting stuff it's exciting
stuff the possibility of being able to
do this at all whether or not we have an
answer here or just an open question
leading to yet more problems allowing
for the unending Quests for knowledge I
don't know but until next time bye-bye
foreign
[Music]